After losing fight to levy 'Amazon tax,' Seattle is back to square one on helping homeless losing.

Corrections and Clarifications: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount raised by the No Tax on Jobs group that opposed a Seattle corporate head tax. The group raised $350,000 to fight the tax.

SAN FRANCISCO – After a bruising, month-long fight in which Amazon and other businesses squelched a new corporate head tax to fund homeless services, Seattle is struggling to find a path forward to deal with a crisis that has exploded in recent years.

Other metropolitan areas with rapidly rising housing costs also are grappling with residents priced out of the market. But Seattle's tax situation puts it in an especially difficult position when it comes to raising funds to help its homeless residents.

It also could be a warning to the 20 cities currently vying to become home to Seattle's second headquarters. Amazon stopped construction on a 17-story office building during the debate over the tax. It would have cost big businesses $275 per employee per year and was approved by a unanimous vote of the Seattle City Council on May 14, then rescinded by seven of nine members of that same council on June 12. 

The construction pause "was a concrete action as opposed to just a threat," said Matthew Gardner, a senior fellow at the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, a nonpartisan, nonprofit in Washington, D.C., focused on federal, state and local tax reform issues.

"It seems pretty clear now that whoever 'wins' the HQ2 battle is very likely going to be giving Amazon a free pass on a wide variety of state and local taxes for some period of time," he said.

Called "the Amazon tax" by many in Seattle, the corporate head tax was meant to raise revenue to deal with the homeless crisis in the city and King County. A count in January found 12,112 unsheltered people in the county, up 4 percent from a year ago.

The numbers come even as unemployment in the county is at 3 percent, the lowest in the state, according to the Washington State Employment Security Department.

The problem is two-fold, experts say. 

Housing is becoming less affordable, leading to more homelessness. At the same time Washington's  tax laws gave cities few options when it comes to raising funds for more housing.

Rents in the city have risen 42 percent over the past seven years, fueled by the growth in high wage earners such as the many white collar workers at Amazon.com.

In 2011, 35 percent of county rental units would have been affordable to to households earning below 50 percent of the median area income. In 2017 that affordability was just 18 percent, according to a report released in May by consulting firm McKinsey & Co. that was commissioned by the Seattle Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce.

This is similar to the homelessness problem in many coastal cities, especially those with tech-fueled economies. Those rent increases have been partly driven up by an influx of well-paid tech workers. In Seattle, for example, software developer is now the most-common job in the area, having overtaken retail salesperson, according to research by "The Seattle Times." 

That has wrought rapid and wrenching changes to the economic makeup of the city.

"This is not the story of the last 15 years, this is the story of the last five years. This is that dramatic. This is that recent," said Alison Eisinger, executive director of the Seattle/King County Coalition on Homelessness.

Tax strategies.